Closure: Function that has access to variables from its outer scope, even after the outer function has finished executing

Closure isn't created from recursion - it's created when an inner function accesses outer variables

Closure example:

function outer() {
  let x = 10;           // 1. Variable created
  return function inner() {
    console.log(x);     // 2. Inner function references x
  };                    // 3. Inner function returned
}                       // 4. outer() execution FINISHES here

let myClosure = outer(); // 5. outer() has finished executing
myClosure();            // 6. But inner() still accesses x = 10

The key point: Normally when a function finishes executing, its variables get garbage collected. But because the inner function still references x, JavaScript keeps that variable alive even after outer() is done.

So when I say "outer finishes," I mean:

The outer() function has completed its execution

Its execution context is gone

But the variable x is preserved because the returned inner function still needs it

That's the "magic" of closures - the inner function "closes over" the outer variables and keeps them accessible even after the outer function is finished.


It's the same x - not copied, not inherited. The inner function maintains a reference to the original variable.

Here's proof:

function outer() {
  let x = 10;
  return {
    getValue: function() { return x; },
    setValue: function(newValue) { x = newValue; }
  };
}

let closure1 = outer();
let closure2 = outer();

console.log(closure1.getValue()); // 10
closure1.setValue(20);
console.log(closure1.getValue()); // 20 - same x was modified

console.log(closure2.getValue()); // 10 - different x from different outer() call

Copy
javascript
What happens:

Each call to outer() creates its own x variable

The returned functions keep a live reference to that specific x

If you modify x through one function, other functions from the same closure see the change

But different calls to outer() create separate x variables

So it's not copied or inherited - it's the actual same variable being kept alive by the closure mechanism. JavaScript preserves the entire lexical environment that the inner function needs.

so basically it is just a memory location that does not get garbage collected and retains a particular scope?

Exactly! You've nailed it perfectly.


A closure is essentially:

Memory locations (variables) that don't get garbage collected

Scope preservation - the inner function keeps the outer scope "alive"

Normally when outer() finishes, its variables would be garbage collected. But because the inner function still references them, JavaScript says "wait, someone still needs this memory" and keeps it around.

So yes - it's a memory location with preserved scope access. The closure mechanism prevents garbage collection of variables that are still reachable through the inner function.

This is why closures can sometimes cause memory leaks if you're not careful - they keep references to variables that might otherwise be cleaned up.

so basically the whole global object we work in is a closure of sorts?

That's a really insightful observation! You're thinking about it correctly in terms of scope persistence, but there's a subtle difference:

Global scope is more like the "root" or "outermost" scope that never gets garbage collected because it's always accessible. It doesn't need closure mechanics to stay alive.

Closures specifically refer to when an inner function captures variables from an outer function's scope that would otherwise be destroyed.

But you're absolutely right that conceptually they're similar - both involve:

Memory that doesn't get garbage collected

Persistent scope access

Variables staying alive longer than their original execution context

The difference is:

Global scope: Always alive by design

Closure: Artificially kept alive because an inner function needs it

So while the global object isn't technically a closure, your thinking about "persistent scope with protected memory" is exactly the right mental model for understanding how closures work!

You're connecting the concepts really well.

so global scope and closures avoid garbage collection. anything else?

Yes, several other things avoid garbage collection:

Active references:

Variables currently in scope and being used

DOM elements that are still attached to the page

Event listeners that haven't been removed

Circular references:

Objects that reference each other (though modern JS engines handle most of these)

Timers and intervals:

setTimeout/setInterval callbacks keep their referenced variables alive

The variables stay alive until the timer is cleared

Module scope:

Variables in ES6 modules persist for the module's lifetime

Similar to global but scoped to the module

Web APIs:

WebSocket connections

Open database connections

Active HTTP requests

The key pattern is: anything that's still reachable won't be garbage collected. JavaScript's garbage collector only cleans up memory that has no remaining references pointing to it.

So it's not just global scope and closures - it's really about reachability from active code.


