Routing Between Networks

Routing is the process of identifying the best path to a remote destination device.

Remote here is meaning a device not local to the sending device.

A router is a networking device that connects multiple Layer 3 (IP) networks.

Routers make their forwarding decisions based on the Layer 3 IP address.

Anytime the network portion of the IP addresses of the source and destination hosts do not match a router must be used to forward the message.

The router receives the message from sender, de-encapsulates the Ethernet frame to read the destination IP address in the IP packet.

It determines where to forward the message, re-encapsulates the packet into a new frame, and forward the frame on to its destination.

The router may have a number of subnets that it must intermediate when messages are sent from devices in different subnets.

The router also must be able to forward messages to other networks across the internet.


Messages Within The Same Network

When a message is being framed the sending host will check the IP of the receiving host and use the subnet mask to determine from the IP if they are on the same network.

If yes, it will use the MAC address to send it directly, via a switch (since it is not directly connected to the destination host physically).

If the host does not have the destination MAC address it will send an ARP to obtain it and continue with the process to send it directly.


Messages Between Different Networks, Same Router

When a message is being framed the sending host will check the IP of the receiving host and use the subnet mask to determine from the IP if they are on the same network.

If not, the sending host checks if it has the MAC of the Default Gateway (router), if not it sends ARP but it probably has it because it would have the IPv4 of Default Gateway.

The router receives the frame and removes the ethernet header information (MAC addresses) and looks up the destination IPv4 in its routing table.

If yes the router re-encapsulates the frame with the source MAC address of the router.

The router must check if the destination IPv4 is on its network.

If yes it must obtain the MAC address of the destination IPv4 so it checks its own ARP table.

When it obtains the destination MAC the routing table will tell it which port to send it through and since this is a subnet still on its own network the frame is sent to the destination MAC.

This method uses the Default Gateway (local router) and therefore it is critical that the correct default gateway be configured on each host on the local network.

If no default gateway is configured in the host TCP/IP setting or if it is incorrect the host cannot communicate with remote network hosts.

Remember though that a router is also able to segment a network into subnets and therefore the same physical router may have different Default Gateway addresses for the different subnets it facilitates.
